Title = "Writing my own static site generator"
Date = 2020-05-18T13:37:00-04:00
---
## Introduction 

Hey, first post! I wanted to set up a blog to track the things that I work on. I figured you can't beat free, so I set up GitHub Pages. Jekyll is the default for Pages, so I dove in to check it out. I could not really figure out a minimal example. Do I just clone in an entire theme to my repo and start working from there? What are all these directories? I need to install Ruby? Figured I could write one in \~100 lines of code, so I set off.

## Golang

I ended up clocking in about \~150 lines for my main file, which I thought would be the heart of the code. The main idea is loop over some markdown posts, md -> html using [Blackfriday](https://github.com/russross/blackfriday), then generate the index from the posts.

```go
func main() {
	id := &IndexData{
		Posts: []PostData{},
	}

	genPosts(id)

	writeTemplate(
		[]string{
			"_templates/index.gohtml",
			"_templates/base.gohtml",
		}, "index.html", id)

	genAbout()
}
```

Since the heart of things is the `genPosts` function, we'll look at that. The first block is listing out the markdown files in the `_posts` folder. Then we kick it off looping over those and generating an HTML file for each.

```go
	files, err := ioutil.ReadDir("_posts")
	if err != nil {
		log.Fatal(err)
	}

	for _, f := range files {
		...
	}
```

The first step is reading the file in, which is pretty straight forward Go code.

```go
		md, err := ioutil.ReadFile("_posts/" + f.Name())
		if err != nil {
			log.Println(err)
			continue
		}
```

Now I jumped right into rendering the markdown using Blackfriday and I kept getting awful parser errors. I was seriously wondering how such a buggy repo could have so many stars! It was user error though. I'm on a Windows host, and the `\r\n` is apparently not handled by Blackfriday! This was the most time consuming thing of the project. That gives us this beautiful function which is just a `bytes.Replace()`.

```go
		md = windowsBad(md)
```

In my review of SSGs I noticed they all had some metadata at the top of the file. This is called *Front Matter*. It seemed simple enough, you have some JSON, YAML, or TOML followed by a delimeter. I chose TOML since I had never used it before. I have a strange affinity for JSON but it is kinda a pain to write. I chose the delimiter `---`. 

Simply split on that, grab the chunk before and treat it as TOML, rejoin the chunk after and treat it as markdown.

```go
		s := bytes.Split(md, []byte("\n---\n"))
		if len(s) < 2 {
			log.Println("Missing post metadata.")
			continue
		}
		md = bytes.Join(s[1:], []byte("\n---\n"))

		var pd PostData
		_, err = toml.Decode(string(s[0]), &pd)
		if err != nil {
			log.Println(err)
			continue
		}
```

The TOML reads right into the `PostData` struct. We have a post title and a date. The tags aren't used right now, but it should be easy enough to whip up some JS for filtering, or individual pages for each tag. The field `Raw` is where the markdown rendered to HTML goes.

```go
type PostData struct {
	Title string
	Tags  []string
	Date  time.Time
	Raw   template.HTML
}
```

After that we render and pass `PostData` to our templates. Then we append the post to the `IndexData` structure we passed in so we can go back and write out the index.

```go
		pd.Raw = template.HTML(
			blackfriday.Run(
				md, blackfriday.WithRenderer(
					NewChromaRenderer())))
		writeTemplate(
			[]string{
				"_templates/post.gohtml",
				"_templates/base.gohtml",
			}, fmt.Sprintf("posts/%s.html", pd.Title), pd)
		id.Posts = append(id.Posts, pd)
```

The function `writeTemplate` is just a convenience wrapper I made for executing templates then writing them to a file. Now that I'm writing this I see I should probably check the error that it returns.

```go
func writeTemplate(t []string, o string, d interface{}) error {
	it, err := template.ParseFiles(t...)
	if err != nil {
		return err
	}

	f, err := os.Create(o)
	if err != nil {
		return err
	}
	defer f.Close()

	return it.ExecuteTemplate(f, "base.gohtml", d)
}
```

I skipped over the `NewChromaRenderer` above. There is a really nice library called [bfchroma](https://github.com/Depado/bfchroma) that adds syntax highlighting support to Blackfriday (amazing!). It doesn't load though. 

Blackfriday got cute with their packaging and are hosting it on `gopkg.in`. I had not really seen this before, but it seems like it knocked a lot of things out of sync. Some places are importing `github.com/russross/blackfriday/v2`. The repo tells you to `go get gopkg.in/russross/blackfriday.v2` though, and import that same URL. When installing bfchroma you can an error that it can't find that `github.com` URL.

I tried forking the repo and swapping out all the URLs for the `gopkg.in` one, but something with the module wanted to store it there but import from `github.com`. It was a mess, I don't know if it was on my end or the packages'. I just ended up grabbing the one file from `bfchroma`, doing some small modifications, and hosting it in this repo.

## Templates

I learned a bit in this project, one of the things I had never touched before was nesting Go templates. I created a base template for the whole site, then define a few sub templates that get jammed in there. The following is out of `base.gohtml`.

```go-html-template
<body>
  <header>
    <span id=title><a href=/>TACIX.AT</a></span>
    <span id=about><a href=/about>About</a></span>
  </header>

  <div id=main>
  {{ template "main" . }}
  </div>

  <footer>
  </footer>
</body>
</html>
```

Then in the specific template, e.g. `index.gohtml` we can just define `main`.

```go-html-template
{{ define "main" }}
  {{ range $p := .Posts }}
    <div class=entry>
      <div class=date>{{ $p.Datef }}</div>
      <div class=post>
      	<a href="/posts/{{ $p.Title }}.html">{{ $p.Title }}</a>
      </div>
    </div>
  {{ end }}
{{ end }}
```

The `writeTemplate` function above handles loading multiple templates and then executing from `base.gohtml`. Neat! I also have one for injecting CSS. In the future when I make some more interactive blogs I will add one for JavaScript.

## Conclusion

This took me about a day of programming with a nice break in the middle to take the dog to the dog park with the girlfriend and see the bats in Austin. I really feel setting up a standard static site generator would have taken as long. The base code is easy enough, the big time sink was styling the blog! I think that is the win with existing SSGs, having prebuilt themes. I shouldn't lie to myself though, I would have definitely taken as long tweaking a prebuilt theme as I did doing my own.

I do like doing things this way. This gives me a base to build future projects off of. I have a static site generator now that I fully understand and can easily add features to. A thought that came to mind with this, it would be pretty easy to take this tech and make a technical-focused markdown-based blogging site. Now if I ever want to build that up, I have a great starting point.

All the [code](https://github.com/TACIXAT/tacixat.github.io) is public so feel free to take a look! The Go code is in `_sssg` (the extra `s` was for *simple*).